Add a new post (#1)
bilelmoussaoui/belmoussaoui.com: content/blog/15-making-rust-attractive-for-writing-gtk-applications.md

+++
title = "Making Rust attractive for writing GTK applications"
date = 2022-10-23
draft = false

[taxonomies]
categories = ["Rust"]
tags = ["Rust"]

[extra]
lang = "en"
toc = true
math = false
mermaid = false
cc_license = true
+++

> [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/), the programming language, have been gaining traction across the whole stack. From the pretty recent [upstream kernel support](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8aebac82933ff1a7c8eede18cab11e1115e2062b), writing games, websites, low level OS components or even desktop applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/), the programming language, has been gaining traction across the whole stack. From the pretty recent [upstream kernel support](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8aebac82933ff1a7c8eede18cab11e1115e2062b) to writing games, websites, low-level OS components and even desktop applications.
```

Author: Replaced the whole sentence with something suggested by Chris, thanks

> [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/), the programming language, have been gaining traction across the whole stack. From the pretty recent [upstream kernel support](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8aebac82933ff1a7c8eede18cab11e1115e2062b), writing games, websites, low level OS components or even desktop applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/), the programming language, has been gaining traction across the whole stack. From the pretty recent [upstream Linux kernel support](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=8aebac82933ff1a7c8eede18cab11e1115e2062b), writing games, websites, low level OS components or even desktop applications.
```

"the whole stack", what stack? :)

Reviewer 3: The sentence structure feels a little weird here - while the relationship between these first two sentences can be inferred while reading, the period makes them feel separated in an odd way, as the second sentence doesn't have a subject. I'd write something like:

> Rust, the programming language, has been gaining traction across many software disciplines - support for it has landed in the upstream Linux kernel, developers have been using it for games, websites, low-level OS components, and desktop applications.

Author: I went ahead with what you suggested Chris, thank you

> The gtk-rs team have been doing an impressive amount of work during the last few years to make the experience of using `GObject` based libraries from Rust enjoyable by providing high quality bindings around those libraries, generated with [gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir) from the [introspection data](https://gi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The gtk-rs team has been doing an impressive amount of work during the last few years to make the experience of using GObject-based libraries in Rust enjoyable by providing high-quality bindings around those libraries, generated with [gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir) from the [introspection data](https://gi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
```

GObject: it seemed better to normalize it to no-backticks across the post, so that's what I did.

> The gtk-rs team have been doing an impressive amount of work during the last few years to make the experience of using `GObject` based libraries from Rust enjoyable by providing high quality bindings around those libraries, generated with [gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir) from the [introspection data](https://gi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The gtk-rs team has been doing an impressive amount of work during the last few years to make the experience of using `GObject` based libraries from Rust enjoyable by providing high quality, memory-safe bindings around those libraries, generated with [gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir) from the [introspection data](https://gi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
```

> Approximately two years ago and few months before the release of [GTK](https://gtk.org/) 4, I decided to take over the maintenance of [gtk4-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs) and push forward the initial work made by Xiang Fan during a Google Summer of Code internship. Nowadays, it is the most used GTK 4 bindings out there with probably more than 100 applications written in it, from simple applications like [Contrast](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.gnome.design.Contrast) to complex ones like [Telegrand](https://github.com/melix99/telegrand) or [Spot](https://flathub.org/apps/details/dev.alextren.Spot).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Approximately two years ago and a few months before the release of [GTK](https://gtk.org/) 4, I decided to take over the maintenance of [gtk4-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs) and push forward the initial work made by Xiang Fan during a Google Summer of Code internship. Nowadays, these are the most used GTK 4 bindings out there with probably more than 100 applications written in it, ranging from simple applications like [Contrast](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.gnome.design.Contrast) to complex ones like [Telegrand](https://github.com/melix99/telegrand) or [Spot](https://flathub.org/apps/details/dev.alextren.Spot).
```

> Approximately two years ago and few months before the release of [GTK](https://gtk.org/) 4, I decided to take over the maintenance of [gtk4-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs) and push forward the initial work made by Xiang Fan during a Google Summer of Code internship. Nowadays, it is the most used GTK 4 bindings out there with probably more than 100 applications written in it, from simple applications like [Contrast](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.gnome.design.Contrast) to complex ones like [Telegrand](https://github.com/melix99/telegrand) or [Spot](https://flathub.org/apps/details/dev.alextren.Spot).

Reviewer 2: How do you know it's the most used GTK 4 binding? Someone might say this is not true :)

Author: I have been following the applications submitted to GNOME Circle the last couple of months and most of the fancy new things are written in Rust in general followed by GJS

> In the following post, I will be talking about the current status and what we have achieved since the first release of `gtk4-rs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, I will talk about the current status, and what we have achieved since the first release of `gtk4-rs`.
```

## Bindings

> As mentioned above, a good portion of the bindings are generated automatically using [gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir) but in some cases a manual implementation is needed like in the following cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, a good portion of the bindings is generated automatically using [gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir). But sometimes, a manual implementation is needed, like in the following cases:
```

- Make the code more Rust idiomatic

> - Handling cases that are too specific to be supported by [gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir)

Reviewer: This could use a small example, right now I'm not sure what this refers to.

> - Writing the necessary infrastructre code to create custom GObjects and so allowing the end user to make their own custom widgets or GStreamer plugins for example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Infrastructure code to create custom GObjects, allowing the user to make things like custom widgets or GStreamer plugins
```

> - Writing the necessary infrastructre code to create custom GObjects and so allowing the end user to make their own custom widgets or GStreamer plugins for example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Writing the necessary infrastructure code to create custom GObjects and by that allowing the end user to make their own custom GTK widgets or GStreamer plugins, for example
```

Reviewer 3: I'd say:

```suggestion
- Writing the necessary infrastructure code to allow developers to create custom GObjects, e.g. custom widgets or GStreamer plugins
```

Or substitute "e.g." with "for example"

> TODO: add some numbers about the amount of manual code in gtk4-rs

Reviewer 2: Don't count GStreamer, it's very bad in the main crate :sweat_smile:

Author: aha, will do gtk4-rs only as I made sure most of what is manual can't be auto generated today

### Subclassing

> In the early days of `gtk3-rs`, the infrastructure for writing custom subclassses wasn't fully there yet, especially that the amount of manual code that has to be written for supporting all the virtual functions (that can be overridden by a sub-implementation) of `gtk::Widget` was a lot. That caused people to avoid writing custom GTK widgets and do plenty of hacks like having one single `ObjectWrapper` GObject that would serialize a Rust struct into a `JSON` to store it as a string property in order to store these Rust types in a `gio::ListModel` and use it with `gtk::ListBox::bind_model`/`gtk::FlowBox::bind_model`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the early days of `gtk3-rs`, the infrastructure for writing custom subclassses wasn't fully ready yet. Supporting all of the virtual functions (that can be overridden by a subclass) of `gtk::Widget` especially required a lot of manual code. That caused people to avoid writing custom GTK widgets and do hacks like having one single `ObjectWrapper` GObject that would serialize a Rust struct into JSON to store it as a string property in order to put these Rust types in a `gio::ListModel` and use it with `gtk::ListBox::bind_model`/`gtk::FlowBox::bind_model`.
```

> In the early days of `gtk3-rs`, the infrastructure for writing custom subclassses wasn't fully there yet, especially that the amount of manual code that has to be written for supporting all the virtual functions (that can be overridden by a sub-implementation) of `gtk::Widget` was a lot. That caused people to avoid writing custom GTK widgets and do plenty of hacks like having one single `ObjectWrapper` GObject that would serialize a Rust struct into a `JSON` to store it as a string property in order to store these Rust types in a `gio::ListModel` and use it with `gtk::ListBox::bind_model`/`gtk::FlowBox::bind_model`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the early days of `gtk3-rs`, the infrastructure for writing custom subclassses wasn't fully there yet, especially the amount of manual code that had to be written for supporting all the virtual functions (that can be overridden by a sub-implementation) of `gtk::Widget` was a lot. That caused people to avoid writing custom GTK widgets and do plenty of hacks like having one single `ObjectWrapper` GObject that would serialize a Rust struct into a `JSON` to store it as a string property in order to store these Rust types in a `gio::ListModel` and use it with `gtk::ListBox::bind_model`/`gtk::FlowBox::bind_model`.
```

> Thankfully that is no longer the case for `gtk4-rs` as a huge amount of work went into making sure we support almost all the types that can be subclassed in Rust with the exception of `gtk::TreeModel`, see <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs/pull/169> for details why that didn't happen yet.

Reviewer: This does not explain how the situation got better. The previous paragraph said "subclassing required a lot of manual code", this paragraph says "subclassing is supported for all types". These are not contradicting statements. What was actually improved?

Author: I have rephrased this to mention that the subclassing traits were actually manually written.

> Thankfully that is no longer the case for `gtk4-rs` as a huge amount of work went into making sure we support almost all the types that can be subclassed in Rust with the exception of `gtk::TreeModel`, see <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs/pull/169> for details why that didn't happen yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thankfully that is no longer the case for `gtk4-rs` as a huge amount of work went into making sure we support almost all of the types that can be subclassed (with the exception of `gtk::TreeModel`, see <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs/pull/169> for details why that didn't happen yet).
```

> Thankfully that is no longer the case for `gtk4-rs` as a huge amount of work went into making sure we support almost all the types that can be subclassed in Rust with the exception of `gtk::TreeModel`, see <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs/pull/169> for details why that didn't happen yet.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention here also that it's deprecated in GTK4 now anyway (and soft-deprecated since 4.0)

> As more people started writing custom GTK widgets/GStreamer plugins, the amount of people looking into simplifying the whole experience grow up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As more people started writing custom GTK widgets/GStreamer plugins, more people started looking into simplifying the whole experience.
```

> As more people started writing custom GTK widgets/GStreamer plugins, the amount of people looking into simplifying the whole experience grow up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As more people started writing custom GTK widgets/GStreamer plugins, the amount of people looking into simplifying the whole experience grew.
```

(they didn't become adults)

Author: Oups

> Creating a very simple and useless custom GTK widget in the days of gtk-rs-core 0.10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating a very simple and useless custom GTK widget looked like this in the days of gtk-rs-core 0.10:
```

```rust
mod imp {
    pub struct SimpleWidget;

    impl ObjectSubclass for SimpleWidget {
        const NAME: &'static str = "SimpleWidget";
        type ParentType = gtk::Widget;
        type Instance = subclass::simple::InstanceStruct<Self>;
        type Class = subclass::simple::ClassStruct<Self>;

        glib_object_subclass!();

        fn new() -> Self {

>             Self()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            Self
```

        }
    }

    impl ObjectImpl for SimpleWidget {
        glib_object_impl!();
    }
    impl WidgetImpl for SimpleWidget {}
}
glib::wrapper! {
    pub struct SimpleWidget(ObjectSubclass<imp::SimpleWidget>)
        @extends gtk::Widget;
}
```

> The same code nowadays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nowadays it looks like this:
```

```rust
mod imp {
    #[derive(Default)]
    pub struct SimpleWidget;

    #[glib::object_subclass]
    impl ObjectSubclass for SimpleWidget {
        const NAME: &'static str = "SimpleWidget";
        type ParentType = gtk::Widget;
    }

    impl ObjectImpl for SimpleWidget {}
    impl WidgetImpl for SimpleWidget {}
}
glib::wrapper! {
    pub struct SimpleWidget(ObjectSubclass<imp::SimpleWidget>)
        @extends gtk::Widget;
}
```

> Of course, the overall code is still a bit too verbose particularly when you have to define `GObject` properties. Although, people have been experimenting with writing a [derive macro](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/494) to simplify the properties declaration part as well as a [`gobject::class!`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/issues/540) macro for generating most of the remaining boilerplate code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, the overall code is still a bit too verbose, particularly when you have to define GObject properties. Although, people have been experimenting with writing a [derive macro](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/494) to simplify the properties declaration part, as well as a [`gobject::class!`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/issues/540) macro for generating most of the remaining boilerplate code.
```

> Of course, the overall code is still a bit too verbose particularly when you have to define `GObject` properties. Although, people have been experimenting with writing a [derive macro](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/494) to simplify the properties declaration part as well as a [`gobject::class!`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/issues/540) macro for generating most of the remaining boilerplate code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course, the overall code is still a bit too verbose particularly when you have to define `GObject` properties. However, people have been experimenting with writing a [derive macro](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/494) to simplify the properties declaration part as well as a [`gobject::class!`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/issues/540) macro for generating most of the remaining boilerplate code.
```

Maybe add a sentence that these are still experiments and needs some more experimenting and time to mature

> ### Composite templates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Composite Templates
```

> In short, it allows you to make your custom `GtkWidget` subclass uses `XML` for providing the widget structure and so allows splitting the UI code from it logic. The UI part can be either inlined in the code or written in a separate file and unless you are using `gresources`, you can opt-in for runtime validation of the XML content using the `xml_validation` feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Composite templates allow you to make your custom `gtk::Widget` subclass use GTK XML UI definitions for providing the widget structure, splitting the UI from the logic. The UI part can be either inlined in the code, or written in a separate file, with optional runtime validation using the `xml_validation` feature (unless you are using `gresources`).
```

> In short, it allows you to make your custom `GtkWidget` subclass uses `XML` for providing the widget structure and so allows splitting the UI code from it logic. The UI part can be either inlined in the code or written in a separate file and unless you are using `gresources`, you can opt-in for runtime validation of the XML content using the `xml_validation` feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In short, composite templates allow you to make your custom `GtkWidget` subclass uses `XML` for providing the widget structure and by that they allow splitting the UI code from it logic. The UI part can be either inlined in the code or written in a separate file, and unless you are using `GResource`s, you can opt-in for runtime validation of the XML content using the `xml_validation` feature.
```

```rust
mod imp {
    #[derive(Default, gtk::CompositeTemplate)]
    #[template(string = r#"
    <interface>
      <template class="SimpleWidget" parent="GtkWidget">
        <child>
          <object class="GtkLabel" id="label">
            <property name="label">foobar</property>
          </object>
        </child>
      </template>
    </interface>
    "#)]
    pub struct SimpleWidget {
        #[template_child]
        pub label: TemplateChild<gtk::Label>,
    }

    #[glib::object_subclass]
    impl ObjectSubclass for SimpleWidget {
        const NAME: &'static str = "SimpleWidget";
        type ParentType = gtk::Widget;

        fn class_init(klass: &mut Self::Class) {
            klass.bind_template();
        }

        fn instance_init(obj: &gtk::glib::subclass::InitializingObject<Self>) {
            obj.init_template();
        }
    }

    impl ObjectImpl for SimpleWidget {
        fn dispose(&self) {
            // since gtk 4.8
            self.obj().dispose_template(Self::Type);
            // before gtk 4.8, for each direct child widget

>             // self.label.unparent();

Reviewer 3: I would put what most people do here, which would be:

```rust
while let Some(child) = self.obj().first_child() {
    child.unparent();
}
```

Reviewer 3: I'd also add a note that `dispose_template()` only works for templates - if you're making a non-template custom widget, you'd need this while-let loop still.

        }
    }
    impl WidgetImpl for SimpleWidget {}
}
glib::wrapper! {
    pub struct SimpleWidget(ObjectSubclass<imp::SimpleWidget>)
        @extends gtk::Widget;
}
```

> Composite templates allows you to also set a function name to be called when a specific signal is emitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Composite templates also allow you to set a function to be called when a specific signal is emitted:
```

        </child>
      </template>
    </interface>
    "#)]
    pub struct SimpleWidget {
        #[template_child]
        pub label: TemplateChild<gtk::Label>,
    }

    #[glib::object_subclass]
    impl ObjectSubclass for SimpleWidget {
        const NAME: &'static str = "SimpleWidget";
        type ParentType = gtk::Widget;

        fn class_init(klass: &mut Self::Class) {
            klass.bind_template();
            klass.bind_template_instance_callbacks();
        }

        fn instance_init(obj: &gtk::glib::subclass::InitializingObject<Self>) {
            obj.init_template();
        }
    }

    impl ObjectImpl for SimpleWidget {
        fn dispose(&self) {
            // since gtk 4.8
            self.obj().dispose_template(Self::Type);
            // before gtk 4.8, for each direct child widget
            // self.label.unparent();
        }
    }
    impl WidgetImpl for SimpleWidget {}
}
glib::wrapper! {
    pub struct SimpleWidget(ObjectSubclass<imp::SimpleWidget>)
        @extends gtk::Widget;
}

#[gtk::template_callbacks]
impl SimpleWidget {
    #[template_callback]
    fn on_clicked(&self, _button: &gtk::Button) {
        println!("Clicked!");
    }
}
```

> More details can be found in <https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/docs/gtk4_macros/derive.CompositeTemplate.html> & <https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/docs/gtk4_macros/attr.template_callbacks.html>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More details can be found in <https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/docs/gtk4_macros/derive.CompositeTemplate.html> and <https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/docs/gtk4_macros/attr.template_callbacks.html>.
```

> ### Book, documentations, examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Book, Documentation, Examples
```

> Providing only great bindings of GTK 4 sadly won't help newcomers trying to learn GTK for the first time despite the increasing number of apps written using `gtk4-rs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Great bindings by themselves sadly won't help newcomers trying to learn GTK for the first time, despite the increasing number of apps written using `gtk4-rs`.
```

> Julian Hofer have been writing a "GUI development with Rust and GTK4" book that you can find at <https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/book/>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that reason, Julian Hofer has been writing a "GUI development with Rust and GTK 4" book that you can find at <https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/book/>.
```

> Julian Hofer have been writing a "GUI development with Rust and GTK4" book that you can find at <https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/book/>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Julian Hofer has been writing a "GUI development with Rust and GTK4" book that you can find at <https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/book/>.
```

> On top of that, we spent a good amount of time ensuring the documentation we provide, which is based on the C library documentation, has valid intra-links, uses the images provided by upstream to represent the various widgets and that most of the types/functions are properly documented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On top of that, we spend a good amount of time ensuring the documentation we provide, which is based on the C library documentation, has valid intra-links, uses the images provided by upstream to represent various widgets, and that most of the types and functions are properly documented.
```

> On top of that, we spent a good amount of time ensuring the documentation we provide, which is based on the C library documentation, has valid intra-links, uses the images provided by upstream to represent the various widgets and that most of the types/functions are properly documented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On top of that, we spent a good amount of time ensuring the documentation we provide, which is based on the C library documentation, has valid intra-links, uses the images provided by GTK C documentation to represent the various widgets and that most of the types/functions are properly documented.
```

(normal people don't understand the upstream/downstream terminology)

> The `gtk4-rs` repository also includes ~35 examples that you can find in <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs/tree/master/examples> as well as a `GTK & Rust` template you can use to initialize your next project <https://gitlab.gnome.org/World/Rust/gtk-rust-template>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `gtk4-rs` repository also includes ~35 examples that you can find in <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs/tree/master/examples>. Finally, there's a `GTK & Rust` application repository template that you can use to get started with your next project: <https://gitlab.gnome.org/World/Rust/gtk-rust-template>.
```

> ## Flatpak & Rust stable/nightly SDKs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Flatpak & Rust SDKs
```

> Beyond the building blocks provided by the bindings, we have also worked on providing a stable and a nightly Rust SDKs that can be used to either distribute your application as a Flatpak or during development time. The stable SDK comes with [Mold](https://github.com/rui314/mold) pre-installed as well, which is recommended if you want a slightly faster linking time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond the building blocks provided by the bindings, we have also worked on providing stable and nightly Rust SDKs that can be used to either distribute your application as a Flatpak or as a development environment. The stable SDK comes with [the Mold linker](https://github.com/rui314/mold) pre-installed as well, which is recommended for improving build times.
```

> Beyond the building blocks provided by the bindings, we have also worked on providing a stable and a nightly Rust SDKs that can be used to either distribute your application as a Flatpak or during development time. The stable SDK comes with [Mold](https://github.com/rui314/mold) pre-installed as well, which is recommended if you want a slightly faster linking time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Beyond the building blocks provided by the bindings themselves, we have also worked on providing stable and nightly Rust SDKs that can be used to either distribute your application as a Flatpak or that can be used during development. The stable SDK comes with [Mold](https://github.com/rui314/mold) pre-installed as well, which is recommended if you want a slightly faster linking time.
```

> Flatpak can be used during development time with either [GNOME Builder](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.gnome.Builder), VSCode with the [flatpak-vscode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=bilelmoussaoui.flatpak-vscode) extension or [fenv](https://gitlab.gnome.org/ZanderBrown/fenv/) if you prefer the CLI for building/running your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flatpak can be used as a development environment with either [GNOME Builder](https://flathub.org/apps/details/org.gnome.Builder), VSCode with the [flatpak-vscode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=bilelmoussaoui.flatpak-vscode) extension, or [fenv](https://gitlab.gnome.org/ZanderBrown/fenv/), if you prefer the CLI for building/running your application.
```

- <https://github.com/flathub/org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.rust-stable>
- <https://github.com/flathub/org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.rust-nightly>

## Portals

> Modern Linux applications should make use of the [portals](https://flatpak.github.io/xdg-desktop-portal/) to request runtime permissions to access resources such as the camera, starting a screencast session or picking a file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modern Linux applications should make use of [portals](https://flatpak.github.io/xdg-desktop-portal/) to request runtime permissions to access resources, such as capturing a webcam feed, starting a screencast session or picking a file. 
```

> Modern Linux applications should make use of the [portals](https://flatpak.github.io/xdg-desktop-portal/) to request runtime permissions to access resources such as the camera, starting a screencast session or picking a file. 

Reviewer 2: Well, arguably just using pipewire directly is equally fine, isn't it? :)

Author: For screencasting yes, i think so but from a sandboxed application you would need access to the pipewire socket which you don't have access to by default

> [ASHPD](https://crates.io/crates/ashpd) is nowadays the way to go for using portals from Rust as it provides a convenient & idomatic API on top of the DBus one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[ASHPD](https://crates.io/crates/ashpd) is currently the way to go for using portals from Rust as it provides a convenient and idiomatic API on top of the DBus one.
```

> Code example from `ashpd-0.4.0-alpha.1` for using the color picker in a desktop environment agnostic way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Code example from `ashpd-0.4.0-alpha.1` for using the color picker in a desktop environment agnostic way:
```

```rust
use ashpd::desktop::screenshot::ColorResponse;

async fn run() -> ashpd::Result<()> {
    let color = ColorResponse::builder().build().await?;
    println!("({}, {}, {})", color.red(), color.green(), color.blue());
    Ok(())
}
```

## Keyring & oo7

> Applications that needs to store sensitive information such as passwords usually go through the [Secret service](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/secret-service/latest/) which is a protocol supported by both gnome-keyring and kwallet nowadays. There were multiple attempts to provide a Rust wrapper of the DBus API but sadly those were lacking either async support, they didn't provide integration with the secret portal or had no way to allow applications to migrate their secrets from the host keyring to the application sandboxed one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications that need to store sensitive information, such as passwords, usually use the [Secret service](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/secret-service/latest/), which is a protocol supported by both gnome-keyring and kwallet. There were multiple attempts to provide a Rust wrapper for the DBus API, but sadly those were either lacking async support, provided no integration with the secret portal, or had no way for applications to migrate their secrets from the host keyring to the application sandboxed keyring.
```

> Applications that needs to store sensitive information such as passwords usually go through the [Secret service](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/secret-service/latest/) which is a protocol supported by both gnome-keyring and kwallet nowadays. There were multiple attempts to provide a Rust wrapper of the DBus API but sadly those were lacking either async support, they didn't provide integration with the secret portal or had no way to allow applications to migrate their secrets from the host keyring to the application sandboxed one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Applications that needs to store sensitive information such as passwords usually go through the [Secret service](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/secret-service/latest/), a protocol supported by both gnome-keyring and kwallet nowadays. There were multiple attempts to provide a Rust wrapper of the DBus API, but some common pitfalls were that they lacked async support, they didn't provide integration with the secret portal, or they had no way to allow applications to migrate their secrets from the host keyring to the application sandboxed one.
```

> Those were the primary reasons we started working on [oo7](https://crates.io/crates/oo7), it is still on alpha stage, but should cover most of the use cases already.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those were the primary reasons we started working on [oo7](https://crates.io/crates/oo7). It is still in alpha stage, but should cover most of the use cases already.
```

## GStreamer

> As part of the experiments I did when porting [Authenticator](https://gitlab.gnome.org/World/Authenticator) to GTK 4 was figuring out how can I replicate the internal GStreamer sink that GTK has to convert a video frame into a `gdk::MemoryTexture` in order to render it in some widget for QR codes scanning purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Part of the experiments I did when porting [Authenticator](https://gitlab.gnome.org/World/Authenticator) to GTK 4 was figuring out how I can replicate the internal GStreamer sink included in GTK to convert a video frame into a `gdk::MemoryTexture` in order to render it in some widget for QR code scanning purposes.
```

Jordan Petridis took over my WIP work and turned it into a proper GStreamer plugin written in Rust, see <https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/gstreamer/gst-plugins-rs/-/tree/main/video/gtk4> for an example on how to use it in your application.

> ## Missing integrations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Missing Integrations
```

> ### Better gettext support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Better Gettext Support
```

> Currently, [gettext](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/) doesn't support Rust officially and most importantly, it doesn't like the `!` character, so we can't use string formatting for translatable texts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, [gettext](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/) doesn't support Rust officially and, most importantly, it doesn't like the `!` character, so we can't use string formatting for translatable texts. 
```

> Currently, [gettext](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/) doesn't support Rust officially and most importantly, it doesn't like the `!` character, so we can't use string formatting for translatable texts. 

Reviewer 2: Just like this nobody (who doesn't know yet) will understand what the relation between ! and not being able to translate strings is :)

Author: I have added a sentence explaining that `!` is used in declarative macros such as `format!` / `println!`

> Kévin Commaille have submitted a [patch](https://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?56774) for upstream gettext but sadly it hasn't been reviewed yet :( For now people are working around this by replacing the variables names with <https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.str.html#method.replace>, not ideal but it is what we have for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kévin Commaille have submitted a [patch](https://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?56774) for upstream gettext but sadly it hasn't been reviewed yet. :( For now, people are working around this by manually replacing variable names with <https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.str.html#method.replace>, which is not ideal, but it is what we have for now.
```

> Kévin Commaille have submitted a [patch](https://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?56774) for upstream gettext but sadly it hasn't been reviewed yet :( For now people are working around this by replacing the variables names with <https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.str.html#method.replace>, not ideal but it is what we have for now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kévin Commaille has submitted a [patch](https://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?56774) for upstream gettext but sadly it hasn't been reviewed yet :( For now people are working around this by replacing the variables names with <https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.str.html#method.replace>, not ideal but it is what we have for now.
```

> ### Reduced boilerplate in subclassing code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Reduced Boilerplate in Subclassing Code
```

> As mentioned above, subclassing code is still too verbose in some cases. Ideally, we would simplify most of it and it is probably one of the most confusing things you have to deal with as a beginner to the gtk-rs ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, subclassing code is still too verbose in some cases. Ideally, we would simplify most of it, since it is probably one of the most confusing things you have to deal with as a beginner to the gtk-rs ecosystem.
```

> ### Even better documentations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Even Better Documentation
```

> I personnally think our documentations have got a lot better in the last couple of releases but there are always things to improve. Here is my wishlist of things that I hope to find the time to work on for the next release:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I personally think our documentation has got a lot better in the last couple of releases, but there are always things to improve. Here is my wishlist of things that I hope to find the time to work on for the next release:
```

> I personnally think our documentations have got a lot better in the last couple of releases but there are always things to improve. Here is my wishlist of things that I hope to find the time to work on for the next release:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I personally think our documentation has gotten a lot better in the last couple of releases but there are always things to improve. Here is my wishlist of things that I hope to find the time to work on for the next release:
```

- Generate properties/signals documentation <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir/issues/1076>
- Basic subclassing code documentation <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir/issues/1319>
- Correct linking of external crates in case of manually implemented functions <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir/issues/1197>
- Generate a UML graph for the object hierarchy <https://github.com/gtk-rs/gir/issues/1035>

Feel free to pick any of the above issues if you would like to help.

> ### Automatically generated subclassing traits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Automatically-Generated Subclassing Traits
```

Presently, we have to manually write all the necessary traits needed for making it possible to subclass a type or implement an interface.

> Sadly, we can't do much about it today as we would need new gobject-introspection annotations, see <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gobject-introspection/-/issues/411>.

Reviewer 2: There are more issues than that though. So maybe

```suggestion
Sadly, we can't do much about it today as we would need new gobject-introspection annotations, see e.g. <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gobject-introspection/-/issues/411>.
```

> ### Fix GNOME CI template to avoid duplicated builds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Fix GNOME CI Template to Avoid Duplicated Builds
```

> Most of the GNOME applications hosted on <https://gitlab.gnome.org> are using <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/citemplates/> as a CI template to provide a Flatpak job. The template is inefficient when building a Rust application as it drops the flatpak repository between a build a test build which means re-building all the crates a second time, see <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/citemplates/-/issues/5>. `flatpak-builder` itself already provides an easy way to run the tests of a specific module, which is what `flatpak-github-actions` uses but I have to yet find the time and apply the same thing to GNOME's CI template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the GNOME applications hosted on <https://gitlab.gnome.org> are using <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/citemplates/> as a CI template to provide a Flatpak job. The template is inefficient when building a Rust application as it removes the Flatpak repository between a regular build a test build, which means rebuilding all the crates a second time, see <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/citemplates/-/issues/5>. `flatpak-builder` itself already provides an easy way to run the tests of a specific module, which is what `flatpak-github-actions` uses, but I am yet to find the time and apply the same thing to GNOME's CI template.
```

> Most of the GNOME applications hosted on <https://gitlab.gnome.org> are using <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/citemplates/> as a CI template to provide a Flatpak job. The template is inefficient when building a Rust application as it drops the flatpak repository between a build a test build which means re-building all the crates a second time, see <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/citemplates/-/issues/5>. `flatpak-builder` itself already provides an easy way to run the tests of a specific module, which is what `flatpak-github-actions` uses but I have to yet find the time and apply the same thing to GNOME's CI template.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the GNOME applications hosted on <https://gitlab.gnome.org> are using <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/citemplates/> as a CI template to provide a Flatpak job. The template is inefficient when building a Rust application as it drops the flatpak repository between a normal build and a test build which means re-building all the crates a second time, see <https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/citemplates/-/issues/5>. `flatpak-builder` itself already provides an easy way to run the tests of a specific module, which is what `flatpak-github-actions` uses but I yet have to find the time to apply the same thing to GNOME's CI template.
```

> ## Special thanks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Special Thanks
```

- Julian Hofer for the gtk4-rs book

> - [Chrisotpher Davis](https://blogs.gnome.org/christopherdavis/), Jason Francis, Paolo Borelli for their work on composite templates macros

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Christopher Davis](https://blogs.gnome.org/christopherdavis/), Jason Francis, Paolo Borelli for their work on composite templates macros
```

> - [Chrisotpher Davis](https://blogs.gnome.org/christopherdavis/), Jason Francis, Paolo Borelli for their work on composite templates macros

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Christopher Davis](https://blogs.gnome.org/christopherdavis/), Jason Francis, Paolo Borelli for their work on composite templates macros
```
:)
